Ready for review: Sign-up form best practices (#4288)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/sign-up-form-best-practices/index.md

authors:
  - samdutton
scheduled: true
date: 2020-11-23
updated: 2020-11-23
description: Help your users sign up, log in and manage their account details with a minimum of fuss.
hero: images/hero.jpg
thumbnail: images/thumbnail.jpg
alt: Clipboard with handwritten page showing list of vegetables sown.
tags:
  - blog
  - forms
  - identity
  - layout
  - mobile
  - security
  - ux
codelabs:
  - codelab-sign-up-form-best-practices
---

<!--  {% YouTube 'alGcULGtiv8' %} -->

If users ever need to log in to your site, then good sign-up form design is
critical. This is especially true for people on poor connections, on mobile, in
a hurry, or under stress. Poorly designed sign-up forms get high bounce rates.
Each bounce could mean a lost and disgruntled user—not just a missed sign-up
opportunity.

{% Aside 'codelab' %}
  If you would prefer to learn these best practices with a hands-on tutorial,
  check out the [Sign-up form best practices codelab](/codelab-sign-up-form-best-practices).
{% endAside %}

Here is an example of a very simple sign-up form that demonstrates all of the best practices:

{% Glitch {
  id: 'signup-form',
  path: 'index.html',

>   height: 5760

Author: Oh dear... I meant to change it to 570 :). Fixed.

You may want to consider password-free sign-in by sending users a code every time they sign in on 
a new device or browser. Sites such as Slack and Medium use a version of this. 

<figure class="w-figure">
   <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">
     <source src="https://samdutton.com/medium-sign-in.mp4" type="video/mp4">
   </video>
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Password-free sign-in on medium.com.</figcaption>
</figure>

As with federated login, this has the added benefit that you don't have to manage user passwords. 

## Consider session length {: #session-length}
 
Whatever approach you take to user identity. you'll need to make a careful decision about session 
length: how long the user remains logged in, and what might cause you to log them out.

There's no one hard-and-fast rule, but you need to consider mobile versus desktop, and whether 
users are sharing on desktop, or sharing devices. 

{% Aside %}
You can get around some of the issues of shared devices by enforcing re-authentication for sensitive 
features, for example when a purchase is made or an account updated. You can find out more about 

> ways to implement re-authentication from [Verify phone numbers on the web with the Web OTP API](/web-otp/#is-it-safe-to-use-sms-as-a-way-to-authenticate) and the codelab [Your First WebAuthn App](https://codelabs.developers.google.com/codelabs/webauthn-reauth/#0).

Reviewer: Web OTP is not about re-authentication. Please remove the link. (SMS OTP form best practices I'm working on neither. Just in case.)

Author: Removed. (I meant that readers should look at your comments in that article, but it sounds like a recommendation to use Web OTP for re-authentication.)

---
title: Sign-up form best practices
subhead: Help your users sign up, log in and manage their account details with a minimum of fuss.
authors:
  - samdutton
scheduled: true
date: 2020-11-23
updated: 2020-12-03
description: Help your users sign up, log in and manage their account details with a minimum of fuss.
hero: images/hero.jpg
thumbnail: images/thumbnail.jpg
alt: Clipboard with handwritten page showing list of vegetables sown.
tags:
  - blog
  - forms
  - identity
  - layout
  - mobile
  - security
  - ux
<!-- codelabs:
  - codelab-sign-up-form-best-practices -->
---

{% YouTube 'Ev2mCzJZLtY' %}

If users ever need to log in to your site, then good sign-up form design is
critical. This is especially true for people on poor connections, on mobile, in
a hurry, or under stress. Poorly designed sign-up forms get high bounce rates.
Each bounce could mean a lost and disgruntled user—not just a missed sign-up
opportunity.

{% Aside 'codelab' %}
  If you would prefer to learn these best practices with a hands-on tutorial,

>   check out the [Sign-up form best practices codelab](/codelab-sign-up-form-best-practices).

Author: Codelab PR: https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/4320
Codelab staging: https://deploy-preview-4320--web-dev-staging.netlify.app/codelab-sign-up-form-best-practices

only when you need to, and when the user sees a clear benefit from providing that data. Bear in mind 
that every item of data you communicate and store incurs cost and liability.

Don't double up your inputs just to make sure users get their contact details right. That slows down 
form completion and doesn't make sense if form fields are autofilled. Instead, send a confirmation 
code to the user once they've entered their contact details, then continue with account creation 
once they respond. This is a common sign-up pattern: users are used to it.

You may want to consider password-free sign-in by sending users a code every time they sign in on 
a new device or browser. Sites such as Slack and Medium use a version of this. 

<figure class="w-figure">
   <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">
     <source src="https://samdutton.com/medium-sign-in.mp4" type="video/mp4">
   </video>
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Password-free sign-in on medium.com.</figcaption>
</figure>

As with federated login, this has the added benefit that you don't have to manage user passwords. 

## Consider session length {: #session-length}
 

> Whatever approach you take to user identity. you'll need to make a careful decision about session 
> length: how long the user remains logged in, and what might cause you to log them out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whatever approach you take to user identity, you'll need to make a careful decision about session 
length: how long the user remains logged in, and what might cause you to log them out.
```

> There's no one hard-and-fast rule, but you need to consider mobile versus desktop, and whether 
> users are sharing on desktop, or sharing devices. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider whether your users are on mobile or desktop, and whether 
they are sharing on desktop, or sharing devices. 
```

devices. 

This makes it extremely important to code sign-up forms correctly, in particular to use the correct 
autocomplete values. For sign-up forms use `autocomplete="new-password"` for new passwords, and add 
correct autocomplete values to other form fields wherever possible, such as `autocomplete="email"` 
and `autocomplete="tel"`.

You should also use the appropriate [`type` attribute](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input/email) 
to provide the right keyboard on mobile and enable basic built-in validation by the browser. 
You can find out more from [Payment and address form best practices](/payment-and-address-form-best-practices#type).

{% Aside %}
[Sign-in form best practices](/sign-in-form-best-practices) has lots more tips on how to improve 
form design, layout and accessibility, and how to code forms correctly in order to take advantage 
of built-in browser features.
{% endAside %}

## Ensure users enter secure passwords {: #secure-passwords}

Enabling password managers to suggest passwords is the best option, and you should encourage 
users to accept the strong passwords suggested by browsers and third-party browser managers. 

> However, many users want to enter their own passwords, so you need to implement rules for password 
> strength. [The US National Institute of Standards and Technology](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63b.html#5-authenticator-and-verifier-requirements) explains 
> how to avoid insecure passwords.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, many users want to enter their own passwords, so you need to implement rules for password 
strength. The US National Institute of Standards and Technology explains 
[how to avoid insecure passwords](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63b.html#5-authenticator-and-verifier-requirements).
```

password if they discover that it's been compromised. To make this easier, you should add a 
[`/.well-known/change-password`](https://w3c.github.io/webappsec-change-password-url/) URL to your 
site that redirects to your password management page. This enables password managers to navigate 
your users directly to the page where they can change their password for your site. This feature is 
now implemented in Safari, Chrome, and is coming to other browsers. [Help users change passwords 
easily by adding a well-known URL for changing passwords](/change-password-url) explains how to 
implement this.

You should also make it simple for users to delete their account if that's what they want.

## Offer login via third-party identity providers {: #federated-login}

Many users prefer to log in to websites using an email address and password sign-up form. 
However, you should also enable users to log in via a third party identity provider, also known as 
federated login.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="images/federated-login.png" alt="WordPress login page">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">WordPress login page, with Google and Apple login options.</figcaption>
</figure>

> This approach has several advantages. For users who create an account using federated login, you 
> don't need to ask for, communicate or store passwords. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach has several advantages. For users who create an account using federated login, you 
don't need to ask for, communicate, or store passwords. 
```

You may also be able to access additional verified profile information from federated login, such 
as an email address—which means the user doesn't have to enter that data and you don't need to do 
the verification yourself. Federated login can also make it much easier for users when they get a 
new device.

[Integrating Google Sign-In into your web app](https://developers.google.com/identity/sign-in/web/sign-in) 
explains how to add federated login to your sign-up options. [Many other](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federated_identity#Examples) identity platforms are available.

{% Aside %}

> **'First day experience'** is increasingly important since many users now expect to log in from 

Reviewer 2: Can you add a link that explains what "first day experience" is? Is it a common UX term?

Author: Ah — good point. It's a bit jargony... Can't find a link :/. I've heard the expression used in relation to Android efforts to make moving to a new/additional device as seamless as possible. Maybe needs a little explanation or tweaking?

Something like this: 

**'First day experience'** of a new device is increasingly important since many people now expect to log in from ...

or

**'First day experience'** when you get a new device is increasingly important. User expect to log in from ...

Reviewer 2: I vote for #2, just put it in double quotes.

Ref: https://developers.google.com/style/quotation-marks?hl=en#single-quotation-marks

explains how and why to validate using Unicode letter matching.
{% endAside %}

## Test on a range of devices, platforms, browsers and versions {: #test-platforms}

Test sign-up forms on the platforms most common for your users. Form element functionality may vary, 
and differences in viewport size can cause layout problems. BrowserStack enables [free testing for 
open source projects](https://www.browserstack.com/open-source) on a range of devices and browsers.

## Implement analytics and Real User Monitoring {: #analytics-rum}

You need [field data as well as lab data](https://web.dev/how-to-measure-speed/#lab-data-vs-field-data) 
to understand how users experience your sign-up forms. Analytics and [Real User Monitoring](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/Rum-vs-Synthetic#Real_User_Monitoring) 
(RUM) provide data for the actual experience of your users, such as how long sign-up pages take to 
load, which UI components users interact with (or not) and how long it takes users to complete 
sign-up.

> * **Page analytics**: [page views, bounce rates and exits](https://analytics.google.com/analytics/academy/course/6) 
> for every page in your sign-up flow.
> * **Interaction analytics**: [goal funnels](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/6180923?hl=en) 
> (where do users abandon the sign-up flow?) and [events](https://developers.google.com/analytics/devguides/collection/gtagjs/events) 
> (what proportion of users click buttons and links and other components of your sign-up pages?)
> * **Website performance**: [user-centric metrics](/user-centric-performance-metrics) (Is any part of 
> your sign-up flow slow to load or [visually unstable](https://web.dev/cls/)?).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Page analytics**: [Page views, bounce rates and exits](https://analytics.google.com/analytics/academy/course/6) for every page in your sign-up flow.
* **Interaction analytics**: [Goal funnels](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/6180923?hl=en) 
and [events](https://developers.google.com/analytics/devguides/collection/gtagjs/events) 
indicate where users abandon the sign-up flow and what proportion of users click buttons, 
links, and other components of your sign-up pages.
* **Website performance**: [User-centric metrics](/user-centric-performance-metrics) 
can tell you if your sign-up flow is slow to load or [visually unstable](https://web.dev/cls/).
```

* [Don't allow compromised passwords](#no-compromised-passwords).
* [Do allow password pasting](#allow-password-pasting).
* [Never store or transmit passwords in plain text](#salt-and-hash).
* [Don't force password updates](#no-forced-password-updates).
* [Make it simple to change or reset passwords](#password-change).
* [Enable federated login](#federated-login).
* [Make account switching simple](#account-switching).
* [Consider offering multi-factor authentication](#multi-factor-authentication).
* [Take care with usernames](#username).
* [Test in the field as well as the lab](#analytics-rum).
* [Test on a range of browsers, devices and platforms](#test-platforms).

## Avoid sign-in if you can {: #no-forced-sign-in }

Before you implement a sign-up form and ask users to create an account on your site, consider 
whether you really need to. Wherever possible you should avoid gating features behind login. 

The best sign-up form is no sign-up form! 

By asking a user to create an account, you come between them and what they're trying to achieve. 
You're asking a favor, and asking the user to trust you with personal data. Every password and item 

> of data you store carries privacy and security 'data debt', becoming a cost and liability for 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of data you store carries privacy and security "data debt'", becoming a cost and liability for 
```

your site. 

If the main reason you ask users to create an account is to save information between navigations or 
browsing sessions, [consider using client-side storage](/storage-for-the-web) instead. For shopping 
sites, forcing users to create an account to make a purchase is cited as a major reason for shopping 
cart abandonment. You should [make guest checkout the default](/payment-and-address-form-best-practices#guest-checkout).

## Make sign-in obvious {: #obvious-account-creation}

Make it obvious how to create an account on your site, for example with a **Login** or **Sign in** 

> button at the top right of the page. Avoid using an ambiguous icon or vague wording ('Get on board!', 
> 'Join us') and don't relegate login to a navigational menu. The usability expert Steve Krug summed up 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
button at the top right of the page. Avoid using an ambiguous icon or vague wording ("Get on board!", 
"Join us") and don't hide login in a navigational menu. The usability expert Steve Krug summed up 
```

Many users prefer to log in to websites using an email address and password sign-up form. 
However, you should also enable users to log in via a third party identity provider, also known as 
federated login.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="images/federated-login.jpg" alt="WordPress login page">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">WordPress login page, with Google and Apple login options.</figcaption>
</figure>

This approach has several advantages. For users who create an account using federated login, you 
don't need to ask for, communicate, or store passwords. 

You may also be able to access additional verified profile information from federated login, such 
as an email address—which means the user doesn't have to enter that data and you don't need to do 
the verification yourself. Federated login can also make it much easier for users when they get a 
new device.

[Integrating Google Sign-In into your web app](https://developers.google.com/identity/sign-in/web/sign-in) 
explains how to add federated login to your sign-up options. [Many other](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federated_identity#Examples) identity platforms are available.

{% Aside %}

> **'First day experience'** is increasingly important since many users now expect to log in from 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"First day experience" when you get a new device is increasingly important. Users expect to log in from
```

and sign-in forms aren't seamless, this is a moment where you risk losing users, or at least losing 
contact with them until they get set up again. You need to make it as quick and easy as possible for 
users on new devices to get up and running on your site. This is another area where federated login 
can help. 
{% endAside %}

## Make account switching simple {: #account-switching}

Many users share devices and swap between accounts using the same browser. Whether users access 
federated login or not, you should make account switching simple. 

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="images/gmail-account-switching.jpg" alt="Gmail, showing account switching">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Account switching on Gmail.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Consider offering multi-factor authentication {: #multi-factor-authentication}

Multi-factor authentication means ensuring that users provide authentication in more than one way. 
For example, as well as requiring the user to set a password, you might also enforce verification 
using a one-time-passcode sent by email or an SMS text message, or by using an app-based one-time 

> code, security key or fingerprint sensor. [SMS OTP best practices](https://web.dev/sms-otp-form) and 
> [Enabling Strong Authentication with WebAuthn](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2018/05/webauthn) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
code, security key or fingerprint sensor. [SMS OTP best practices](/sms-otp-form) and 
[Enabling Strong Authentication with WebAuthn](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2018/05/webauthn) 
```

from updating their username. On your backend you should generate a unique ID for every user account, 
not an identifier based on personal data such as username.

Also make sure to use `autocomplete="username"` for usernames.

{% Aside 'caution' %}
As with personal names, ensure that usernames aren't restricted to characters from the [Latin 
alphabet](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Regular_Expressions/Character_Classes#Types:~:text=Latin%20alphabet). [Payment and address form best practices](/payment-and-address-form-best-practices#unicode-matching) 
explains how and why to validate using Unicode letter matching.
{% endAside %}

## Test on a range of devices, platforms, browsers and versions {: #test-platforms}

Test sign-up forms on the platforms most common for your users. Form element functionality may vary, 
and differences in viewport size can cause layout problems. BrowserStack enables [free testing for 
open source projects](https://www.browserstack.com/open-source) on a range of devices and browsers.

## Implement analytics and Real User Monitoring {: #analytics-rum}

> You need [field data as well as lab data](https://web.dev/how-to-measure-speed/#lab-data-vs-field-data) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You need [field data as well as lab data](/how-to-measure-speed/#lab-data-vs-field-data) 
```

to understand how users experience your sign-up forms. Analytics and [Real User Monitoring](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/Rum-vs-Synthetic#Real_User_Monitoring) 
(RUM) provide data for the actual experience of your users, such as how long sign-up pages take to 
load, which UI components users interact with (or not) and how long it takes users to complete 
sign-up.

* **Page analytics**: [page views, bounce rates and exits](https://analytics.google.com/analytics/academy/course/6) for every page in your sign-up flow.
* **Interaction analytics**: [goal funnels](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/6180923?hl=en) 
and [events](https://developers.google.com/analytics/devguides/collection/gtagjs/events) 
indicate where users abandon the sign-up flow and what proportion of users click buttons, 
links, and other components of your sign-up pages.
* **Website performance**: [user-centric metrics](/user-centric-performance-metrics) 

> can tell you if your sign-up flow is slow to load or [visually unstable](/cls/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can tell you if your sign-up flow is slow to load or [visually unstable](/cls).
```
